---
layout: post
title: "What Are We Really Building?"
author: Siddhit Sanghavi
published: false
---
Services. 

That's the answer I get when I ask myself this question after reading Marc Andreseen’s stirring article, ‘It’s time to build!’, my response is we are truly only building highly innovative services in the United States. Is that a bad thing? No. But it’s not what we need more of.

Marc expresses anguish at emergency responders using rain ponchos as COVID-19 personal protective equipment. I agree it’s terrible we use rain ponchos but I wasn’t a bit surprised. Where I worked (Ford Motor Co), resources in the plant were never enough. If you were from engineering (yes, sorry manufacturing engineering, not coding engineering) and you offered to help with regular production, you’d never leave. There are no shiny cafes and bean bags - we have depreciating buildings and machines to tend to, unions to please and no matter how shiny you think new factories are today, they all will end up the same, just give them 115 years. Because we just aren’t putting any thought to how manufacturing can be disrupted. It’s the same since Pratt and Whitney invented part standardization and Henry Ford popularized the assembly line. And it’s Marc who points out, it’s not because we don’t have the money, it’s because we don’t really want to use it for what I call the ‘filthy, unsexy’ important problems. But that’s precisely what your community (Silicon Valley investors, not you per se) is not doing either, Marc.

Paul Graham, whose essays I start reading whenever I start looking at YC jobs (thinking it will make me a better thinker and I’ll choose to work at a future unicorn) says ‘a genius can be described as someone who has a disinterested obsession in something that matters’ but it clearly looks from the portfolios of both these extremely successful investors that these ‘filthy’ problems don’t really matter to them. Most of the companies are websites offering services utilizing already build things. Ordering pizza, reserving rooms in a dwelling, finding dance studios or at most finding people who made things, but never making path breaking innovations in actually making physical things. When I looked at YC jobs in late 2020 when I wanted to leave my job at Ford, not a single founder looked like they would be the next Henry Ford. Not a single company today is truly and intentionally disrupting how manufacturing is done. Still, I found Pashi, a company trying to help manufacturers with its factory SaaS platform.

This much needed innovator in atoms, not bits is rare. Elon Musk is the closest we have -- he shows all the signs -- vertical integration, use of advanced materials, cross-functional use of technology, moving fast with things perceived as immovable, like giant sheds, tunnels and gigafactories. His tweet provides hope that he might just change how manufacturing itself is done, that the ‘factory is the product’. There are others[Ford Rouge] trying [Nuro] to do this too. It almost looks like he was sent to Silicon Valley to teach people (and investors) that after you make a lot of money from building something that needs very little funding (‘permissionless’) like building Whatsapp or PayPal, you should maybe put that money into building highly ‘permissioned’ businesses that can help us innovate in atoms, not just reinvest in other things made of bits. Here I use Naval Ravikant’s terminology because though I am a huge fan, I disagree that we will all be wealthy by productizing ourselves permissionlessly. I have no doubt we will all be wealthy one day, but only when autonomous machines in dark factories make our shoes, drones deliver them and our smart houses replace our domestic help. 

Why? Because we don’t want the shoe maker in China to make more money by becoming a web-developer! We want them to become mechatronics engineers who build robots that make shoes. I find it sad that people think ‘software is eating the world’ just because our pizza was delivered by DoorDash and your order went through the Domino’s app on your phone during lockdowns -- the girl making the pizza still does the same mind-numbing work! The driver in the DoorDash car isn’t doing something more creative. Silicon Valley genius isn’t solving those filthy problems -- it’s ignoring them! It’s not solving them because they are uninterested. Did they create a new slice in the wealth pie with the apps? Yes! Only a fool would deny that; money was created out of thin air for a driver who was willing to fetch the pizza. But could we have aimed higher? Of course. Are we saying a YC or A16Z startup doesn’t have the brains or resources to revolutionize pizza automation? I don’t believe it. The delivery part is almost autonomous and even Ford, a company that was moving slow with tech capabilities, is almost there (at least on fixed routes). But you see how it’s mostly slapping sensors on top of the car rather than rethinking how an autonomous car should be? But I’ll take it, Nuro and Zoox are thinking that way. So why didn’t we automate pizza? A Dominos pizza is made almost the same way everywhere and so is a McDonald’s burger. In fact, every mass produced physical item -- pizza, engines, batteries, phones and even houses. So why does Apple still send the manufacturing to China, a country whose data and privacy policies are an antithesis of its own? Lack of curiosity, nothing else. If the economics makes sense, why bother? It sounds a lot like, if the economics of ICE cars makes sense, why bother making the air cleaner and cars simpler and quieter? If someone comes to your fancy home with a long rod to cleanse the clogged toilet and earns well unclogging toilets, why make smarter toilets? Even if it’s much simpler to make autonomous tractors than it is to make autonomous cars (no pedestrians, no traffic lights, very repetitive routes, known ancillary implements like tillers, harvesters, precision farming availability) why bother freeing up farmers’ time with a $5000 electric autonomous tractor if I get my Chipotle order via my app? 

You all tell me, because I don’t know why. And I don’t recognize this America.

With curiosity comes imagination and with that comes the ability to find good explanations of how problems can be solved, paraphrasing David Deutsch. And for humans being a wealthy, united, interplanetary species, Silicon Valley just isn’t doing much of the unsexy stuff.
